""Primordial Being-in-the-World" is a cursed phrase"

Heidegger's language is hard, and it often has something of a mystical ring to it. As it becomes more common in cognitive science, and in my area of research HCI, we hit problems of translation, and potentially create divisions between areas of research which are otherwise quite compatible. Heidegger believed that everyday language had become misleading due to the influence of philosophical assumptions he rejected. To escape that influence he coined innumerable neologisms. I am told that even in the original German this can make his work hard to read. In English, which lacks German's lego-like modularity the problem is amplified considerably. *Vorhanden* and *Zuhanden* become the clumsy hyphenations "ready-to-hand" and "present-at-hand", and "Ent-fernung" often becomes the opaque "de-severence".

This awkward, opaque language connects up with other elements of Heidegger's reputation to create real problems of credibility for those less familiar with his work. Heidegger's work does in fact contain a streak of conservatism, tends towards a rural aesthetic, and is often anti-technology.  Adding tho this, he has often (wrongly in my view) been interpreted as an anti-scientific philosopher, by friends as often as enemies. It is therefore easy to hear mysticism in his language, alongside obfuscation and calls to authority. I think this is a shame, since there is so much of value in his work, and since his influence on AI and cognitive science is increasingly significant. As such, in this short post I want to pick apart just one example of Heideggerian language - one that has a particularly funny smell for english speaking scientists: "primordial being in the world"


The occasion for this post is a twitter exchange I was involved in yesterday, with the roboticist Daniel Estrada and the Human Centred Design researcher Jelle Van Dijk. The exchange began with Estrada commenting that the Heideggerian phrase ""primordial being-in-the-world" is a cursed phrase; the people who use it are selling snake oil. phenomenological essentialism is still essentialism". Now, my research focuses in part on applications of Heidegger's thought in Human Computer Interaction, but even so, I understand Estrada's reaction. In English the the words "primordial" and "being" both have a new-agey ring, and for a cognitive scientist, used to fighting off appeals to primacy of common sense folk psychology, the phrase can sound a lot like an appeal to authority. As Estrada says in the thread, it has the ring of essentialism about it, and a particularly invincible kind of call to authority, since the authority called upon, is one's own first person experience. Nonetheless, I think Heidegger's thought is not essentialist, at least where it matters for cognitive science. In fact Heidegger specifically argues that Humans and entities like us are characterised by the fact that they have no essence. His work instead emphasises the existence of human beings in particular context and conditions. We can get to some understanding of this by taking apart this "cursed phrase": "primordial being-in-the-world"


My general preference when confronted with a phrase, is to "deflate" its language - let out some of the air and bring it back down to earth - and a good way to do this is by substituting more familiar language, and relating it to concrete claims. In this case we can do both - we can first ditch the word "primordial", and then we can relate it to an established strand of scientific research - ecological psychology. "Primordial" commonly translates "ursprunglich" in Heidegger studies, but it is not universally agreed on as a good translation, at least not in all circumstances. Dreyfus, for example, notes that, in contexts like the one we are discussing, he prefers "originary": "originary being in the world". This indicates, more straightforwardly, that "being-in-the-world" is considered a source - the source of features of human experience and existence. This already helps a little, I think, making meaning clearer and diminishing some of the new-agey and mystical atmosphere. If "originary" still retains too much of a Tolkeinesque twang for you, then my personal feeling is that we can triangulate our translation with another term - "genetic". This places emphasis on the role of the origin in development of features. That is, the fact we are situated in the world is crucial to the development of all features of our experience and existence, and that situatedness is the essential feature for understanding human experience, and existence.

Now this does not entirely clear up the issue. It is a common issue of conservative and retrograde accounts that they place too much emphasis on origins in understanding the genesis of a feature. Think of recent abuses of evolutionary psychology, or indeed fascist accounts of culture (to which Heidegger indeed flew too close, being for a while a member of the Nazi party). But in this case a better understanding of Heidegger's meaning can be approached by relating Heidegger's ideas to those of the ecological psychologist James J Gibson - best known to Human Computer Interaction researchers via his notion of affordances. On Gibson's account the agent's context, its situatedness in an environment, is primary if we wish to understand its behaviour. While Heidegger's account goes further than Gibson's in many ways, 

Gibson's account 

but I can point the way to an answer by linking Heidegger's thought to that of the ecological psychologist James J Gibson.





Connection to ecological psychology, relationality and context

But going beyond this into description of ... 

While 